algorithmic trading can be tough
especially when you're just starting out
since there are seemingly so many things
to look out for in this video we're
going to cover some of the biggest and
most common algorithmic trading mistakes
avoiding all of these mistakes can lead
to a significant improvement in your
trading performance with that being said
let's jump right into it when developing
a trading algorithm you use historical
data to test your algorithm and analyze
its past performance this gives you
great feedback as to how good or bad
your algorithm would have performed over
the chosen timeframe even though back
testing is a great tool that is
fundamental for any algorithmic trader
it can also be dangerous if done
incorrectly back-testing can do more
harm than good
the first algorithmic trading mistake
that we're going to look at is a classic
back-testing mistake one of the biggest
and most common back-testing mistakes is
overfitting overfitting is the act of
over optimizing your algorithm to the
test data let me give you a specific
example to clarify this this is the
price chart of X Y Z over a selected
week from this pricing data you could
create a trading algorithm that buys X Y
Z on Monday says X Y Z on Tuesday bias
on Wednesday and finally sales on
Thursday over this week this algorithm
is probably one of the best performing
algorithms that exists but if you look
at any other week this algorithm would
probably perform terrible since the
entire idea behind this algorithm is
based on this one week of pricing data
in other words this algorithm is over
fitted to this week even though back
testing this algorithm over this week
shows great returns this algorithm is
utterly useless
so when back testing it is fundamental
not to over optimize your algorithm to
historical data one of the best ways to
avoid overfitting is leaving a good
percentage of the available test data
untouched for example you can only use
about 60% of the available historical
data when developing your ergo as soon
as you think your Elega is at a far
enough stage you can test it on the
untouched data if the
performance is significantly worse on
the untouched data than on the data he'd
used to develop it you probably over
fitted it
another common algorithmic trading
mistake is using data in your algorithms
that isn't actually available at the
time the easiest example of this is the
daily high or low and algorithm that
buys at the daily low and says that the
daily high will have a phenomenal
historical performance but in reality it
won't really work because you don't know
the daily high or low beforehand using
daily highs and lows in your algorithm
might seem like an obvious mistake but
there are similar situations that aren't
as obvious so always make sure that your
algorithm only uses information that
actually is known before they use it the
worst part about this mistake is that it
can be very hard to notice it since back
testing won't help you realize that
you're making this mistake an algorithm
that uses future data to make decisions
will work great in back testing but
terrible with live data since it can't
actually access future data one way to
avoid this mistake is walk-forward
testing walk-forward testing is
basically the opposite of back testing
instead of using past data to test your
algorithm you use live data to test it
but without actually risking any money
so walk forward testing is basically the
paper trading of algorithmic trading
this brings us to our next
ergo trading mistake they need not walk
forward testing your algorithms compared
to back testing walk forward testing can
be quite tedious and boring bag testing
allows you to test you algorithm on
years of data in a matter of minutes
whereas walk-forward testing takes one
day for one day of trading data due to
this walk-forward testing is often
overlooked or ignored altogether this is
a huge mistake
since walk-forward testing is one of the
best ways to test your algorithm without
running the risk of falling prey to back
testing mistakes great walk forward test
results are far more important than
great back test results back testing
results can be good for a variety of
reasons other than that your algo
actually is good overfitting or using
future data to predict the future are
just two examples
can lead to great back test results walk
forward testing is immune to such errors
which makes it a great tool to test your
strategies with that being said it is
important to be patient and not to jump
to any conclusions one day or week of
walk forward test results aren't enough
to say whether your algo is good or bad
the next major algo trading mistake that
has made way too often is not accounting
for trade costs when testing an
algorithm
most people account for the obvious
trade cost such as trading commissions
and feeds but besides these costs there
are various other trading costs that can
have a significantly bigger impact to
your bottom line let me give you a few
examples first off it is important to
account for costs associated with
liquidity depending on what you trade a
good assumption is to say that you
always have to pay the bid-ask spread
when you're opening or closing trades
furthermore depending on your trade
volume you should also account for
slippage if a security is thinly traded
and you're using limit orders which you
should if sometimes won't be able to get
in or out of the position at all many
back-testing engines don't account for
this which can lead to unrealistic
results last but not least depending on
what you're trading there might be
additional costs associated to your
trading for instance if your short sale
a given security it is important to
consider the costs of shorting besides
accounting for borrow fees you should
also account for the fact that the
sometimes might not even be any shares
too short remember that not every
security can always be shorted hopefully
these examples give you an idea about
what trading costs and restrictions you
should think about when developing and
testing your trading algorithms certain
backtest engines already account for
some of these trade costs so if you are
using a commercial bag tester it can be
a good idea to check how trade costs are
being handled a different algorithmic
trading mistake is going too big too
soon after your algorithm has performed
great use on back tests you might be
excited and eager to test it out with
real money but often your algorithm
isn't actually ready for that yet
instead you should continue refining it
adding some safeguards stress testing it
walk-forward testing it and so on
only after you've done all these things
and your attagirls past all the
necessary tests you should start
allocating real money to it but even
then you should not start with any
significant amount of capital instead
start out small with very little risk
depending on the implementation and
broker integration some problems might
pop up and believe me
you much rather want to find these
problems with a few thousand dollars at
risk than with a few thousand dollars on
the line
another big trading mistake is not
trusting your algorithm if you have done
all the just mention steps there's no
reason for you not to trust your ergo
that doesn't mean that you should
blindly throw money at it and let it do
its thing but you shouldn't constantly
interfere with what it's doing if you
step in that manually change a trade
every second day you won't be able to
analyze the algorithms true performance
since it never gets the chance to
actually trade so make sure to give you
a go some breathing room with that being
said you should still keep a close eye
on what it's doing if it starts making
trades that don't seem to make any sense
at all it can be a good idea to double
check and potentially step in and
override it the next mistake that I want
to talk about is copying someone else's
code sometimes you might be very
inclined to just use someone else's code
if you're just starting out that's one
of the best ways to get started and get
to know the basics of ergo trading but
besides using other people's code to
learn or as a rough template for you to
start with you should stay away from
copy pasting code that isn't yours
the problem with copying someone else's
code is that you might not fully
understand what's actually going on so
unless you really understand what's
happening and fully understand the idea
behind the code you shouldn't just use
someone else's code instead try to
develop your own trading algorithms this
will also give you a much better
learning experience and just to make
sure I want to re-emphasize that this
does not mean that you can't use parts
of other people's code to help you
understand the concepts or to learn how
to do certain things you just shouldn't
copy-paste someone else's entire trading
algorithm and expect it to work for you
the next algorithmic trading mistake is
a general programming mistake that is
especially common amongst beginning
programmers namely not commenting your
code when coding a trading algorithm
were
anything else for that matter you should
always leave complimented comments that
help you understand what your code is
doing when programming
this might seem somewhat unnecessary
since at that point you'd likely
understand everything but if you don't
touch that piece of code for just two or
three weeks it will already be much
harder to grasp what's actually going on
the more advanced the code is the bigger
this problem becomes that's why it is
fundamental to leave comments in SATA
code that will help future you
understand what's going on when writing
the code try to leave comments so that
even someone who has never seen your
code before would understand it ix
algorithmic trading mistake is only
paying attention to the total return of
the algorithms when developing analyzing
and comparing your trading a gross you
need some method to evaluate their
performances the most obvious and
easiest way to assess an algorithms
performance is its total return at the
end of the day you want to make the most
money possible right well I'd argue that
the way you make the money is just as
important let me give you a very simple
example for this example we will compare
the performance of two trading
algorithms this is the percentage return
chart of the first algorithm over one
year as you can see it has a total
yearly return of 40% and here's the
chart of the second ago which only had a
yearly return of 30% which of these
algorithms would you rather allocate
your money to even though the first one
outperformed the second one in regards
to the total return it water was down
80% at a certain point most traders
won't continue using an error off that
loses 80% over a few months this means
they would never even have experienced
the recovery hopefully this example
shows that the total return of a trading
strategy is the best measure to evaluate
and compare different algorithms
therefore it's important to look at
other metrics besides return some
helpful measures are the risk volatility
of returns max drawdown drawdown periods
and more certain indicators incorporate
metrics such as volatility risk and
performance into one measure one of
these indicators is the Sharpe ratio
this is a great indicator that allows
you to easily and quickly Gorge and
compare the performance of your
algorithms the last mistake that I want
to talk about is not having a strategy
when creating your trading algorithm
there is a very important step that you
need to do before creating a trading
algorithm and that's developing a
trading strategy a trading algorithm
simply is a concrete implementation of
an abstract trading strategy the trading
strategy can be thought of as the idea
and the algorithm the execution
developing a trading strategy is all
about coming up with lots of ideas
testing their validity and moving on let
me give you an example one possible idea
might be that the two major market ETFs
spui and QQQ are heavily correlated and
there might be an edge in trading around
the temporary price discrepancies the
next step would be to partially test
this hypothesis by looking at SP wise
and qqs historically correlation if
everything looks good you could start
trying to build some sort of strategy
around this idea if you want to see some
more detailed examples of possible
trading strategies I highly recommend
checking out my recent video on the
different types of algorithmic trading
strategies that exist let's now quickly
sum up the algorithmic trading mistakes
that were covered in this video
first make sure not to over fit your
algorithms to the backtest data one way
to avoid doing this is by leaving a
certain percentage of the available back
test data untouched for later secondly
make sure that all the information that
your algorithm uses is in fact known at
the time that it uses it predicting the
future with future information only
works if the future is in the past
next up make sure to take advantage of
the benefits that walk forward testing
offers walk-forward testing your eligos
is a great addition to back testing
otherwise it is also very important to
correctly account for trade costs and
restrictions besides the obvious trade
commissions
furthermore make sure not to go too big
too soon when you're ready to fit you
algorithm real money make sure to start
out small and then slowly scale up if
everything works fine if you algorithm
has proven itself over and over again
you should trust it this means that you
interfere with it on every second trade
otherwise you'll never know what your
algorithm actually is capable of when
developing your own trading algorithm
make sure to fully understand and think
about every aspect of it this means that
you shouldn't just copy someone else's
code and hope for the best in addition
to that it's important to thoroughly
comment out your code so that you can
always come back later and still
understand what's going on the ninth
algorithmic trading mistake is not
accounting for risk when evaluating your
algorithms performance obviously the
total return of the algorithm is
important but it's just as important to
understand how you Agger achieved this
return last but not least make sure to
develop a trading strategy before you
try to create a trading algorithm
trading algorithm simply is one concrete
way of implementing your trading
strategy I highly recommend checking out
my video and Egger it be trading
strategies to get some inspiration with
that being said I truly hope you enjoyed
this video and learn something new if
you have any suggestions for future
videos definitely make sure to let me
know in the comment section below
otherwise make sure to smash the like
button subscribe and turn on the
notification bill for more content like
this thanks for watching
you